They know what they're doing. Actually easy for us to say with the lower
gravity, it's a lot easier to roll. Now you tell me. Yes, and so I was more
worried than I led on to Director Lunney at the time. Jerry expressed it pretty
well. By then, our major problems were bent fenders. By the time we flew Apollo
17, we learned how to do it, and isn't that always just the way? Let's see. And
we have been talking for over two hours. You're amazingly patient. We've gone up
and in many ways touched on not only the first missions but the last. I suggest
a couple of three more questions, and then I'm sure that our panelists would be
happy to stay around and visit individually with a few of you that have one or
two questions left. Let's see. Somebody who's not asked in the front. I would
just like you to take a moment and look into the future with all this great
anniversary that we're celebrating today. What in your all-in opinion is coming
in the next 10 years?
That might be a good question to end on. Do you want to address it right now? Do
you want to take one or two others and then we'll come back for a prediction of
the future? Good question. Why don't we take a couple of others and then we'll
answer that. The panel will answer that. Yes. Yes.
Was there any feeling on the part of the flight controllers that procedures
left undone that would be very important to do as we went to Apollo 16 and 17,
knowing that those were the last ones? I'll take a crack at that one. I can't
think of anything. And I know, and I was with it right till the very last, but,
and I hope this comes out right. I think, by and large, most of us were
realistic enough to know the Apollo program couldn't go on forever. We had
pretty much done what we had set out to do, and besides that, there were guys
that were already looking at this winged vehicle called Shuttle that would be
reusable, and by the time we flew 17, the first vote in the Congress that had
already happened, in fact, it happened on 16, where we got the initial funding
for the shuttle. And I think there was at least, and I'm trying to put it in my
own context in what other people had to say, I think we were ready to move on
psychologically. We would have flown more if they'd lined them up. We'd have
continued to do it. But I think we were ready to go on to the next step. And I
think by the time we got to 17, there wasn't much new that we could do. with the
hardware and the capability that we had with Apollo. And I can't recall anything
that was kind of left undone. And I really was, I know in my own case, I was
ready to get out of the control center environment for a while to go do
something else. And that was in December of 1972 and I didn't realize it. But in
April, I was in Washington. So I didn't intend to go quite that far that fast,
but Mr. Kraft took me at my words.
OK.
One other question before the last one. OK. Right in the middle.
The question is, has there been any thought of recording the knowledge that's
come from the flight controllers and their co-workers with regard to Apollo and
others as we prepare hopefully to head out to Mars. And I don't want to hog this
thing, but I'll take a minute to have a touch. You know, everything we've done
in this country, major achievements, technological achievements, we've always
stood on the shoulders of those that went before us. You think of the airplane
world, and you think of the space world. Guys like Dr. Goddard got us started
with rockets and von Braun and Chris Kraft and others, we're still standing on
those people's shoulders today. I think people like us up here have a
responsibility like they did to participate in a proper kind of way as
technology goes on. And heck, here's the case, we've got this guy still working
for NASA and one over there still working for a major contractor for NASA, still
involved. Cliff and I have gone on to private sector duties and Joe Allen over
there is making all this money in the commercial space world. No, Sorry.
Anyhow, I think that you will see and without getting too profound here or too
philosophical, I think today we have a better capability to call on people and
their talent when we need it than maybe we did even back several years ago. And
I think it will be used. I would say, though, right on the heels of that, and it
goes back to something I said in my opening remarks, I think it's very, very
important to excite the younger people, the youth, like we did in the 60s. and I
look at these kids, I know my kid was here earlier, I know Glenn's son is in
here, he's so much smarter than we were at the same point that I don't think we
have anything to worry about in terms of finding talent in this country to go to
Mars or wherever we want to go and I feel very good about it, just turn them
loose and let them do it, that's the point Good Jerry, let me ask you to repeat
your question about Oh.
Does the funding wanna be there for 20 years? The question is, where's the space
program going and the opinion of the panel, and on what schedule, what can we
look forward to? And Steve, let's start with you at that end. Unfair because
these other fellows are more qualified now. I'm gonna touch just a piece of it
because I think the rest of the panel may have a broader perspective. Clearly we
have a space station in work and clearly we're working very hard to that. I
would like to come back, for my part, to the question that was previously asked,
and that is how are we going to do it? I am struck by how little I knew of what
the major issues were in the Apollo program. When I got here, all I worried
about was how I was going to design my next display and do my next procedure.
And there were some very fundamental things going on. There were some very
brilliant men, and we've mentioned some, and another man was Dr. Miller, who
probably allowed us to go to the moon by 1970. The thing I see now is young
people come in and they are not just satisfied to do displays and procedures.
They also want to learn how this program is being put together and how the
management of it will be conducted 20 years from now. And that tells me that
whatever we choose to do, we're going to be able to do it. I didn't do that and
I think I'm depurred for it. They are doing it and I think they're the richer
for it and I think a lot of the people in the audience are here to learn that
sort of thing. As far as the future, clearly, if I look back 20 years and say
have we as far as I thought we'd be in 20 years, the answer is no. And why,
gosh, you could talk about that, from here to eternity, I would just hope that,
as a minimum, in the next 10 years, we keep on the steps we've laid out for
ourselves, which is the next logical step of Space Station and then exploiting
that. You know, I think, picking up on what Steve just said, there I think part
of this is brought about by the tremendous difference in communication that we
have today, that we didn't have 20 years ago. In our higher education system, I
think is better, and there's a lot of reasons why these younger people think the
way they do. But one is, they're better in excuse me, they're better informed.
They have been since they were this tall. That's good news, I think, for the
space program, because I think the young people in the country that have grown
up with it and they're coming into young adulthood now are better informed. And
I think they may demand more. I hope they do. And I hope that they will be able
to do something we haven't been able to do in the last 20 years and that's bring
what I'd call a renewed or a recurring excitement to the space effort. Now, that
kind of sounds like a downer. I believe over the last 20 years though, we have,
if you look at the shuttle, a tremendous accomplishment. We have been able to
bring it online and, yes, we had a very tragic halt in that program similar to
what we had in Apollo, and had a tougher time, get it going again. But it is
going again now. So we've got to continue the shuttle program's successful
operation over the next several years. and I don't think there's any doubt that
that will happen. I think the Congress is behind that. I think the
administration and the agency are all in sync. Space Station, having some fits
and starts getting started. And I think the reason, although it's approved and
although it's ongoing, is that it did not have the strong backing of the
administration and the Congress locked arm to arm to make it happen. It survived
kind of barely and got started. And it's a program that has had to battle
extremely hard at a time when the country is undergoing tremendous financial
deficits and competing arrangements. I think we need to do a better job in that
regard, incidentally. And this is not easy, but we got to do a better job. And
there is a sign that it's happening of communicating with the American people
what the space program is all about. And I don't mean in a technocrat kind of
way, I'm talking about shaking up their emotions. And we're seeing a little of
that around this Apollo 11 celebration. But then it quickly tends to die out. If
there's a message that I would say to go on now to back to the moon and
establish a base or on to Mars or wherever. We've got to learn that in the space
program where the federal dollar is going to support most of it, there will be
commercial growth as well, but most of it in the near term is going to be
federal dollars. We've got to get down in the trenches and play the way the rest
of the country plays that game. We've always been the fair-haired boys and the
fair-haired girls on the block. People love NASA. They thought it was doing the
right kind of thing, and we just almost didn't have to work real hard at it. Now
that's an overstatement, to make a point, but we've got to get down now and play
this game politically, just like everybody else has played for, and they've got
some of them 200 years of experience on us, and there's signs that that's
happening, with congressional clout applied in a way that members of Congress
can understand, which is generally with political action committees and other
kinds of straight talk. And I believe that the American people, man on the
street and woman on the street, clearly support what we do in space and would
support more. But they're going to have to have the politicians, and I'm talking
about the elected officials and the appointed officials in the executive branch
and the members of Congress get that message. I think we will go on in the next
20 years. So I think your 11-year-old son's got a great future. If he wants to
make it in space, we're not going to stop. It's not going to be easy and we're
going to have some fits and starts and so forth. But I think by the time he's
ready to step into one of those consoles over there at Mission Control, he's
going to have something to operate. It'll be a fun time.
Cliff? Well, I don't know that I can add anything to what Jerry and Steven said.
I had the same question put to me 20 years ago, I think, about where you think
we'll be in 20 years. And my answer was wrong, because we're not there. I would
have thought we would already have a space station in orbit. We did have some
forgotten program called Skylab, which is unfortunate that we weren't able to
continue with that. I tend to agree with Jerry. I think that there will be a
space program. I don't think the country can afford not to have a space program.
As far as a schedule, I think that's the rub. I think it's going to be very
difficult to get anybody to commit to, yes, I want to do this by this time.
Because as soon as they do that, they sort of define the envelope how many
dollars it's going to take to do it and we saw that in shuttle. For years we
used schedule as a reprogramming authority for money. We let schedule slip so we
didn't have to spend the money. I see it being out of NASA these days. I see it
going on with the space station now. It looks to me like they headed down the
same road. But I don't mean that to be discouraging. I And if you don't get to
go as fast as you want to go, and I'm sure you won't, you hardly ever do, keep
plugging. Because I think that we're going to be there, and I think we're going
to put that space station up and have a human presence in space from the United
States.
Chair Greg Musilké – I speak to that subject as a space cadet. All of us up here
are space cadets. We believe in what we are doing. We believe it's important to
our people in this country. And it's probably important, just as important to
everybody on earth. I believe the things that we will do in the future, the
missions, the kind of purposes that we will have will kind of revolve around
sort of two thoughts. One is, we ought to learn how to exploit the space
capabilities we have We have to do everything possible to return a direct
benefit to our people here on earth as soon as we possibly can. By that I mean,
although it's struggling, I believe in the kind of idea that Joe Allen's company
here represents. That is that there is a way to provide a commercial space
platform for the manufacturing of materials in space. That's what I mean by
exploitation. That, communications, weather, understanding what's going on in
our planet, contributing to whatever we could do from space to understanding
global pollution and solutions perhaps there too. I think that is something that
we can contribute to and we ought to in some substantive way. I believe also
that there will always be an exploration component element of our space cadet
outlook and our space program. By that I mean we will build a space station. We
will use it as a jumping off base to go back to the moon. someday on some
schedule. We'll also use the moon to jump off from and go on to someplace else.
Perhaps we'll go to Mars from the moon for all I know, but that, those two
components of the space program will now continue. If you were to ask anybody up
here or ask almost anybody where the space program will be in 100 years, I mean
they, the mind tends to conjure up Star Trek kind of images about what we could,
do in 100 years compared to where we are today wasn't much more than 100 years
ago people came here and covered wagons. Look what we're doing today. So if you
just extrapolate that and say what could we do in 100 years, we could be doing
some pretty vast and important things and for all I know have a lot of people,
very very many people in the population working and operating in space. I think
that will happen on some schedule, but I don't know what it is. but I think the
space program, as it moves forward today, will be exploiting what we're able to
do for direct benefit to Earth, and retaining and building on the exploration
component, which I think is an important part of the inspiration that the space
program offers. So for those of you who have to run it, the question was asked
before about corporate knowledge, you should learn whatever you can from the
experiences of the past and the history and those people who participated in
those things, and you ought to learn what you can for them. But my advice is to
take charge of it. Get on with it. And don't wait for anybody to tell you. It's
your program as much as anybody's, so you take charge of it. Well, thank you.
I'd like to thank the panel. You're a lot better disciplined than I had feared.
I did enjoy it. I appreciate it. and please join me in showing your
appreciation. Applause
Most of you are late for work.